A History-Aware Visually Grounded Critic for Computer Use Agents
Jaewoo Lee1 Zaid Khan1 Archiki Prasad1 Justin Chih-Yao Chen1
Supriyo Chakraborty2 Kartik Balasubramaniam2 Sambit Sahu2
Elias Stengel-Eskin3 Hyunji Lee1 Mohit Bansal1
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill1 , Capital One2 , University of Texas at Austin3

Abstract

ing directly on complex visual interfaces (Hong
et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2025; Awadallah et al.,
2025), such as selecting incorrect UI elements.
Since many GUI actions are irreversible (Wu et al.,
2025), relying on post-execution correction is often unsafe and impractical, motivating the use of
test-time intervention to prevent errors before execution. To provide such intervention, existing
work employs reward models (Chae et al., 2025b;
Xiong et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2026) that offer
scalar feedback to score candidate actions. However, in GUI environments with continuous parameter spaces (e.g., pixel coordinates), scoring alone
is uninformative when all candidates are poor, trapping the policy in failure modes with no path to
improvement (Luo et al., 2025; Ning et al., 2026).
In contrast, natural language (verbal) feedback can
explain why an action fails, enabling the policy to
recover and progress toward task completion. Thus,
critic models that provide this kind of verbal feedback have emerged as a promising alternative to
scalar reward models for test-time intervention.
Despite this conceptual shift, effective test-time
critique, which serves as a pre-execution action
evaluation to intercept a policy’s proposed action before the action alters the environment, requires two underexplored capabilities by existing
approaches. First, a reliable critic must maintain visual grounding. Existing methods tend to
rely on the policy’s verbalized action intent (e.g.,
‘double-click on “SpecialProjects”’ shown in Figure 1 (Right)). As a result, they may erroneously
approve a logically sound intent that is visually misaligned, such as an intent targeting incorrect coordinates or hallucinating state-transitions (Chae et al.,
2025a; Zheng et al., 2026). This risks allowing spatial or reasoning errors to bypass the pre-execution
action evaluation. To help a policy maintain task
progress, a critic needs to keep track of historical
state (i.e., what has been accomplished and failed).
Our work aims to fill these gaps by introduc-

arXiv:2606.11078v1 [cs.AI] 9 Jun 2026

Various test-time interventions for Computer
Use Agents (CUAs), including critic models,
have been developed to improve performance
through pre-execution action evaluation in complex Graphical User Interface (GUI) environments. However, existing critics suffer from
two key limitations: they (1) focus primarily
on short-sighted decision loops (e.g., forgetting
earlier actions) and (2) lack the visual grounding needed to detect flawed actions (e.g., clicking wrong UI elements). To address these, we
introduce H I V I G, a History-aware Visually
Grounded test-time framework, built around
a multimodal critic trained on real GUI trajectories to abstract past interactions into a
compact record and to evaluate actions with
visual grounding. At test time, H I V I G integrates the critic into the policy decision loop
to provide macro-action history, which summarizes the policy’s completed achievements,
and visually grounded critique, which verifies
raw execution coordinates against the current
screenshot to intercept errors before execution.
Across web, mobile, and desktop benchmarks,
H I V I G consistently outperforms existing scalar
and verbal critics, improving average success
rates over the strongest baseline by 5.8% for
Qwen3-VL-32B and 9.0% for Gemini-3-Flash,
and demonstrates strong cross-platform generalization. Ablations show that macro-action
history mitigates short-sighted planning and
visually grounded critique reduces execution
errors, with both components being critical for
test-time scaling in long-horizon GUI tasks.1

1

Introduction

Computer Use Agents (CUAs) are widely used to
automate long-horizon tasks in Graphical User Interface (GUI) environments (Deng et al., 2023; He
et al., 2024; Koh et al., 2024). The underlying policy models inevitably make mistakes while operat1

Code available at https://github.com/G-JWLee/HiViG

1

User Instruction: Remove all empty
folders within “Downloads” directory.

…
CUA

Observation:
“SpecialProjects” folder is empty.
Explore on the “SpecialProjects”
Double-click [300, 450]

Trapped in errors:
1. Already explored “SpecialProjects”
2. Wrong grounding on “Photos”

Repeating suboptimal decision
Explore on the “SpecialProjects”

Candidates
Click “Downloads” directory
0.1
⋮

Double-click “SpecialProjects”

Score
0.1
0.2

Verbal feedback
The current action will open the “SpecialProjects” folder.
Refined Action
Double-click on the “SpecialProjects”
Double-click [300, 450]
History State Tracking
- Clicked “Downloads” directory.
- Confirmed that “SpecialProjects” folder is empty.
Visually Grounded Error Analysis
The red ‘X’ mark is positioned on the
“Photos” folder … Re-exploring a
known empty folder is redundant ...
Refined Action
Delete the “SpecialProjects” folder

(1) Best-of-N (Scalar feedback)
Traps agents in low reward regions
(all candidate actions are poor).

(2) Previous Critic (Verbal feedback)
Lack visual grounding.
Prone to state transition hallucination.
Fail to track historical states.

(3) Our Critic (Verbal feedback)
Generate visually grounded error
analysis for robust error recovery.
Predict state transition learned from
real GUI trajectories.
Provide history state tracking for
policy’s better history-aware decision.

Figure 1: Comparison of test-time interventions for Computer Use Agents (CUAs). Left: Lacking historical
awareness and proactive error-recovery, standard policies easily become trapped in short-sighted decision loops.
Right: Existing approaches are limited. Scalar feedback (top) traps policies in low-reward trajectory regions when
all candidate actions are suboptimal. Previous critics (middle) rely heavily on textual intent, missing spatial and
reasoning errors, and fail to provide historical awareness. In contrast, our critic (bottom) verifies raw execution
coordinates, predicts immediate visual state outcomes grounded in its learned state transition knowledge, and
provides visually grounded error analysis that intercepts errors before execution. Furthermore, it equips agents with
history state tracking, condensing past interactions to guide them toward the final task objective.

ing History-aware Visually Grounded (H I V I G)
test-time intervention framework Figure 1 (Rightbottom). H I V I G resolves prior shortcomings by
equipping CUAs with two core capabilities. First,
to overcome the failure to track historical state,
H I V I G maintains history state tracking. To
enable better history-aware planning of policies
over long horizons, H I V I G provides a macroaction history that summarizes past interactions to
date. By recursively compressing past interactions
into multi-step achieved goals (e.g., “Successfully
opened the ‘Downloads’ directory and confirmed
the ‘SpecialProjects’ folder is empty”), this helps
the policy to track global task completion and avoid
redundant decisions. Second, to address the lack
of visual grounding, H I V I G performs visually
grounded error analysis. Rather than overly replying policy’s textual intents, H I V I G verifies raw
execution coordinates against actual visual states.
If a proposed action is flawed, our framework identifies the error dimension (e.g., visual hallucination,
termination misjudgment) to provide the policy
with corrective guidance before execution. Inside
our framework, we propose H I V I G-critic, a multimodal model trained to serve as a method for
test-time intervention with these dual critique generation capabilities. To this end, we construct a
training corpus derived from open-sourced, multidomain GUI trajectories (Liu et al., 2026). First, to

teach history state tracking, we train the critic to update a macro-action history by integrating the last
visual change with the past macro-action history to
track long-term goal achievement (Figure 3 (Topright)). Second, to teach visually grounded error
analysis, we train the critic to evaluate successful
and flawed actions through a reasoning process: it
verifies execution coordinates against the current
screenshot for visual grounding, predicts the visual state-transition to assess the action’s causal
effect, and evaluates the action’s relevance to the
task (Figure 3 (Bottom-right)).
To validate the efficacy of H I V I G, we conduct
extensive evaluations across three diverse, longhorizon GUI benchmarks: WebArenaLitev2 (web;
Liu et al., 2026), AndroidLab (mobile; Xu et al.,
2025b), and WindowsAgentArena (desktop; Bonatti et al., 2025). We evaluate our test-time intervention on two CUA policies: Qwen3-VL32B-Thinking (Qwen Team, 2025) and Gemini3-Flash (Gemini Team, 2025), representing openand closed-weight models capable of navigating
complex visual interfaces. Our empirical results Table 1 show that existing scalar rewards and visually ungrounded critics frequently degrade the performance of already highly-capable policies. In
contrast, H I V I G improves Gemini-3-Flash’s overall success rate by 15.0% (30.5% to 45.5%) on
WebArenaLitev2 benchmark. H I V I G also gener2

(2) Visually Grounded Error Analysis

(1) History State Tracking

User Instruction

User Instruction
Macro-action
History 𝑡𝑡-1

Update

Observation 𝑡𝑡-1
Action 𝑡𝑡-1

Observation 𝑡𝑡

Critic

Trajectory 𝑡𝑡

Observation 𝑡𝑡

Mark
red ‘X’

Macro-action
History 𝑡𝑡

Proposed Action 𝑡𝑡

History State
Tracking

Proactive Error
Recovery

Critic
Visually Grounded
Error Analysis

Reasoning: The red ‘X’
marker is positioned on the
white space. The agent
claims to be targeting
“Explore” but it is not visible
in the screenshot…
Overall Grading: Bad
Error: Visual Hallucination
Explanation: The click will
fail silently because the
marker is placed on the
empty white space...

Overall Grading: Bad

⋯

Policy
Observation 𝑡𝑡

Proposed
Action 𝑡𝑡

Policy
Overall Grading: Good

Refined
Action 𝑡𝑡

Observation 𝑡𝑡+1

Figure 2: Overview of H I V I G test-time intervention framework. Top-left: By analyzing visual changes between consecutive states, our critic updates the prior macro-action history, compressing micro-steps into macro-achievements.
Top-right: our critic verifies raw pixel coordinates against the current visual state and predicts the impact of the
proposed action, thereby catching spatial or reasoning errors before execution, outputting specific error dimensions
to drive proactive error recovery. Bottom: At test time, the policy uses the macro-action history for better decisionmaking, and uses the visually grounded error analysis to refine the flawed action before execution.

alizes across different GUI environments, outperforming the strongest baseline critics by 9.0% and
5.8% when guiding Gemini-3-Flash and Qwen3VL-32B-Thinking, respectively. Overall, H I V I G
is an test-time intervention framework that effectively guides strong policies to better complete
long-horizon GUI tasks with history state tracking and visually grounded error analysis.

2

conditioned on the instruction, the current observation ot , and the execution history Ht−1 , i.e.,
at ∼ π(·|I, Ht−1 , ot ). The trajectory Ht−1 =
(a1 , a2 , . . . , ot−W +1 , at−W +1 , . . . , ot−1 , at−1 )
is a structured history that, to manage MLLM context limitations in long-horizon GUI tasks, retains
the complete sequence of past actions together with
only the most recent W visual observations (Qwen
Team, 2025; Wang et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2026).
The generated action at typically consists of verbalized intent (e.g., ‘Click the browser’s Back button
in the top-left corner’) and a pixel-based mouse or
keyboard event (e.g., {“action”: “left_click”,
“coordinate”: [10, 20]}). The environment
executes at and transitions to the next visual state
ot+1 , repeating until the policy generates a termination action or exhausts its computational budget.

History-aware Visually Grounded
Test-time Intervention (H I V I G)

We first introduce the preliminaries of the CUA
paradigm in Section 2.1. We then describe the data
construction of two supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
datasets jointly used to train the H I V I G-critic in
Section 2.2 for history state tracking and visually
grounded error analysis. Finally, in Section 2.3, we
present the overall H I V I G framework (Figure 2)
and describe how the trained critic is deployed at
test time to guide policies.
2.1

2.2

Critic Data Construction

We construct two distinct datasets to train H I V I Gcritic for two capabilities: (1) history state tracking and (2) visually grounded error analysis, as
shown in Figure 3. Specifically, we leverage an
off-the-shelf MLLM as an annotator to automatically derive data from open-sourced, multi-domain
GUI trajectories from ScaleCUA (Liu et al., 2026)
training corpus. By conditioning the annotator on
the verified action execution outcomes present in
the source corpus, we ensure the resulting data is
grounded in environmental reality rather than the
annotator’s parametric reasoning.
History State Tracking. To train our critic to
track and supply the macro-action history, we con-

Preliminary: Computer Use Agent (CUA)

To automate digital tasks, we adopt the standard CUA paradigm, where a Multimodal Large
Language Model (MLLM) operates as a policy
that generates actions to interact with a Graphical User Interface (GUI) environment to fulfill a
user instruction I (Wang et al., 2025; Xu et al.,
2026). As illustrated in Figure 2 (Bottom), at
each timestep t, the environment provides a raw
visual observation ot (i.e., a GUI screenshot). The
policy π then generates a subsequent action at
3

Execution tuple 𝒕𝒕

History State Tracking Data Construction

User Instruction:
Remove the
specified recipes
from the
Broccoli app:
tomato apple

Click on the
"tomato"
recipe in the
recipe list
Observation 𝒕𝒕

Expert step 𝒕𝒕

Macro-action
History 𝑡𝑡-1

Observation 𝑡𝑡

Observation 𝒕𝒕+1

Expert Action 𝑡𝑡

Observation 𝑡𝑡+1

Visually Grounded Error Analysis Data Construction

Step 3. Multimodal Rationale Extraction

Step 1. State-transition Extraction State-transition (𝒗𝒗𝒕𝒕)
Observation 𝑡𝑡

Expert Action 𝑡𝑡

Observation 𝑡𝑡+1

Annotator

Trajectory 𝑡𝑡

The screen will
transition to a
detailed view of the
selected recipe,
displaying its
specific content and
interaction options.

Marked Observation 𝑡𝑡

Expert Action 𝑡𝑡

State-transition 𝑡𝑡

Step 2. Plausible Error Synthesis
Expert Action 𝑡𝑡

Error Dimension
(Observation
Neglect)

Annotator

Perturbed Action 𝒕𝒕

Trajectory 𝑡𝑡

Observation 𝑡𝑡

Annotator

Annotator

Macro-action History t
Progress Summary: The Broccoli app is active;
the "apple" recipe has been successfully
deleted. The "tomato" recipe detail page is
now open, preparing for its deletion.
Last Action Result: Navigated to the "tomato"
recipe detail page from the main recipe list.

Trajectory 𝑡𝑡

Click on the search
icon to initiate a
search for the
‘tomato’ recipe

Marked Observation 𝑡𝑡

Perturbed Action 𝑡𝑡
Errored Outcome

Visually Grounded Error Analysis for Expert Action 𝒕𝒕
<think> The marker is positioned over the "tomato" within
the recipe list item. The click will cause the app to navigate
to a detailed view of the recipe. The structural transition to
the detailed view will enable the subsequent deletion step,
confirming this action is appropriate.</think>
Overall Grading: Good
Explanation: …
Visually Grounded Error Analysis for Perturbed Action 𝒕𝒕
<think> The marker is positioned over the search icon in
the top-right corner. Clicking the search icon will trigger
search mode. The action is bad because the "tomato"
recipe is already visible on screen, violating the principle of
efficient interaction with visible elements.</think>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Observation Neglect
Explanation: …

Figure 3: Data construction for H I V I G. From the execution tuple (top left), we construct two distinct SFT datasets.
Top: For history state tracking, the annotator iteratively translates visual state changes into a compact macro-action
history to track long-term goal progress. Bottom: For visually grounded error analysis, we extract ground-truth
state-transitions (Step 1) and synthesize plausible errors (Step 2). In Step 3, the annotator generates a multi-stage
rationale that leverages a visual marker (red ’X’) for visual grounding and the extracted state-transitions. (Note:
User instructions are omitted here for simplicity.)

struct a training dataset using an iterative compression mechanism (Figure 3 (Top-right)). First, given
a successful trajectory, i.e., (o1 , a1 , . . . , ot , at )
from the source corpus, we segment the sequence
into overlapping execution tuples consisting of the
user instruction, the previous visual observation,
the executed action, and the resulting visual observation: τt = (I, ot , at , ot+1 ), as shown in Figure 3
(Top-left). At timestep t, the MLLM annotator
takes the previous macro-action history Ht−1 and
the tuple τt as inputs. The annotator translates the
visual difference between the two consecutive observations into text to identify valid UI updates or
silent failures. Merging this analysis with the previous macro-action history Ht−1 , it recursively compresses past atomic steps into an updated macroaction history Ht containing multi-step achieved
goals, which our critic leverages to guide the policy
to have better history state understanding during its
next-step planning.

sent the immediate visual impact of each successful
action in natural language (Chae et al., 2025a; Mei
et al., 2025). Given the execution tuple τt , we
prompt the MLLM annotator to generate a verbalized state-transition vt that describes the observed
causal effect of the action. Because the annotator
conditions on the actual resulting screenshot ot+1 ,
vt reflects a visual change rather than inferred intent (Figure 3 (Bottom-left)). These verbalized
transitions provide a compact and interpretable representation of short-term dynamics, acting as the
basis for rationale generation in Step 3.
Step 2. Plausible Error Synthesis. To synthesize a comprehensive set of common GUI failure
modes reported in recent CUA literature (Li et al.,
2025; Wang et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2026; Jin et al.,
2026), we prompt the annotator to systematically
perturb the expert action at into a perturbed action ât (Figure 3 (Bottom-left)). This generation
is guided by a taxonomy of 12 diverse error dimensions observed in CUA literature (the complete
taxonomy, the distribution of each error type, and
representative examples are in Appendix B), including Grounding Errors (e.g., intent is correct
but clicking adjacent non-interactive space), Procedural Prerequisite Neglect (e.g., typing without focusing the search field), and Visual Hallucinations
(e.g., targeting a non-existent UI element). Conditioned on the user instruction I, past interaction

Visually Grounded Error Analysis. To enable
our critic to penalize errors from policy actions,
we construct a dataset that captures diverse failure
modes using visually grounded rationales. The
dataset construction process consists of three steps:
(i) state-transition extraction, (ii) plausible error
synthesis, and (iii) multimodal rationale extraction.
Step 1. State-transition Extraction. To ground
error analysis on real GUI state changes, we repre4

trajectory ht = (a1 , a2 , . . . , at−1 ), current observation ot , and expert action at , the annotator selects
the most appropriate error from the taxonomy to
ensure these synthesized errors are plausible.
Step 3. Multimodal Rationale Extraction. Using
the expert action at and perturbed action ât , we
prompt the annotator to generate fine-grained, stepby-step rationales, as shown in Figure 3 (Bottomright). To enforce spatial awareness lacking in
prior critics, we apply two strategies during data
construction. First, to break the model’s overreliance on text, we mask the policy’s verbal intent in 30% of samples. Second, we render a visual marker (Yang et al., 2023) on the screenshot
ot at the exact proposed coordinates and instruct
the annotator to reason based on the marker, extracting the supervisory signal needed to teach the
target critic to perform action verification using
this marker position at test time. Conditioned on
the provided action causal effect, which is either
the ground-truth state-transition vt for at or the
pre-defined failure outcome for ât (e.g., clicking inactive space yields no UI update in Ground Error),
and this marked screenshot, the annotator structures a rigorous reasoning process. Specifically, it
first visually verifies the action by identifying the
UI element directly beneath the marker, preventing
it from overly relying on the textual intent. Next,
incorporating this visual verification and provided
action causal effect, the annotator evaluates the action’s alignment with the user instruction I, and
outputs verbal feedback that can include a corresponding error dimension and a corrective explanation to guide a policy. This pipeline yields diverse
SFT samples of visually grounded rationales (Figure 3 (Right-bottom)), providing the optimal data
to teach our critic precise action verification.
2.3

initial action at . Once proposed, the critic verifies this action. To ground the critic’s analysis in
visual observation, we render the visual marker
at the action’s proposed coordinates on the screenshot. Given the user instruction I, the execution trajectory ht , and this marked observation, the critic
evaluates the proposed action using its learned reasoning process: visual verification, state-transition
prediction, and instruction alignment. If graded
“Good”, the action is directly executed, advancing
the GUI to the next observation ot+1 . If the action
is rated “Bad”, the critic classifies the failure into
one of the predefined errors and generates a verbal
explanation. This pre-execution evaluation serves
as an constraint, forcing the policy to refine its action, and enables continuous progress toward the
goal, preventing the compounding of silent failures.

3

Experiments

3.1

Setup

Computer Use Agents. To execute complex GUI
tasks and evaluate test-time intervention frameworks, we use two distinct Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) as Computer Use Agent
(CUA) policies: Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking (Qwen
Team, 2025), an open-source model; and Gemini-3Flash (Gemini Team, 2025), a closed-source frontier model. We employ a generalized pixel-based
action space adapted from Qwen Team (2025),
where policies interact with environments by generating structured JSON tool calls encompassing
standard operations (e.g., click, type, scroll, swipe).
The complete specifications for the desktop and
mobile action spaces can be found in Appendix C.
Dataset. To train our critic, we construct SFT
dataset using the ScaleCUA (Liu et al., 2026) training corpus which contains GUI trajectories spanning web, mobile, and desktop environments. Using Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking as the MLLM annotator, we generate 52k mixed samples, including 20k history state tracking and 32k visually
grounded error analysis.
For evaluation, we conduct experiments across
three representative computing ecosystems: web,
mobile, and desktop. For the web environment, we
use WebArenaLitev2 (Liu et al., 2026; Zhou et al.,
2024), comprising vision-centric tasks performed
in 5 diverse websites with a 15-step maximum horizon. To assess mobile GUI control, we employ
AndroidLab (Xu et al., 2025b), evaluating agents
across 9 mobile applications with task-specific step

Test-time CUA Guidance

During deployment, H I V I G framework operates
alongside the underlying CUA policy and H I V I Gcritic provides continual history tracking and error
recovery. As illustrated in Figure 2, our framework
intervenes in two distinct phases at each timestep
t. First, before the policy plans its next move,
the critic updates the macro-action history. By
processing the previous execution tuple τt−1 =
(I, ot−1 , at−1 , ot ) and prior history Ht−1 , it produces an updated history Ht . By articulating visual
changes and mapping them to global task progress,
macro-action history equips the policy with the history state tracking required to propose an informed
5

Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking

Method

Gemini-3-Flash

WALv2

ALab

WAA

Avg.

WALv2

ALab

WAA

Avg.

Base agent

13.0

44.2

35.7

31.0

30.5

58.0

35.8

41.4

OpenCUA
SE-WSM

14.9
11.7

47.1
45.7

35.2
31.6

32.4
29.7

29.9
30.5

57.2
57.2

35.8
35.1

41.0
40.9

CGI (32B)
CGI (8B)
GUI-Critic-R1

16.9
12.3
13.6

46.9
44.2
49.3

33.7
31.0
34.4

32.5
29.2
32.4

29.9
26.6
22.1

55.8
55.1
53.6

37.9
37.9
32.5

41.2
39.9
36.1

H I V I G (Ours)

25.3

51.5

38.0

38.3

45.5

61.6

44.2

50.4

Table 1: Comparison of test-time interventions on Qwen3-VL-32B and Gemini-3-Flash across GUI benchmarks
in diverse environments. The best and the second best overall success rate results are in bold and underline,
respectively. H I V I G delivers gains in all benchmarks. WALv2: WebArenaLitev2 for web, ALab: AndroidaLab for
mobile, WAA: WindowsAgentArena for desktop, and Avg.: average overall success rate. Detailed performances for
each benchmark are in Table 6, Table 7, and Table 8.

limits. Finally, for the desktop environment, we
use WindowsAgentArena (Bonatti et al., 2025),
comprising Windows 11 OS tasks grouped into 6
categories (Rivard et al., 2025) bounded by a 30step horizon. Across all benchmarks, performance
is measured by execution-based task success rates.
Further details are in Appendix A.

ing hyperparameters, computing resources, and inference configurations are provided in Appendix A.
3.2

Results and Discussion

H I V I G outperforms existing test-time interventions across diverse GUI platforms and policies.
To evaluate the efficacy and cross-platform generalizability of H I V I G, we benchmark test-time interventions across three distinct GUI environments:
web (WebArenaLitev2), mobile (AndroidLab), and
desktop (WindowsAgentArena). As shown in Table 1, H I V I G consistently improves both the openweight Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking and the frontier
closed-source Gemini-3-Flash policies, achieving
average absolute gains in overall success rate of
7.3% and 9.0% across the three domains, respectively. These improvements are observed in all
three environments, demonstrating strong crossplatform generalization. This strong generalization stems from H I V I G relying solely on raw GUI
screenshots and pixel-level visual understanding,
without requiring platform-specific features such
as DOM or accessibility tree.
H I V I G consistently achieves performance gains
over the Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking as the base
policy, outperforming strong baselines. Specifically, our framework surpasses the base agent by
12.3%, 7.3%, and 2.3% in absolute overall success rate on WebArenaLitev2, AndroidLab, and
WindowsAgentArena, respectively, and surpasses
the best baseline on each benchmark by 5.8% average overall success rate. We additionally evaluate H I V I G using the highly optimized, frontierclass Gemini-3-Flash as the policy backbone, to
demonstrate the versatility of our test-time intervention approach. Although Gemini-3-Flash is al-

Baselines. We compare our approach against
three distinct categories of test-time intervention:
(1) Base agent: the unguided CUA, serving as a
reference that executes the policy without any testtime intervention. (2) Scalar feedback (PRMs):
To compare against standard Process Reward Models (PRMs) operating in a Best-of-N search, we
adapt established step-evaluation templates (Lin
et al., 2025) from OpenCUA (Wang et al., 2025)
and SE-WSM (Sun et al., 2025). We simplify
these into standard PRM templates using the same
backbone model (Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking) as our
critic, and set N = 2 to match the computational
cost of verbal frameworks, which allow a maximum of two policy calls per step. (3) Verbal
feedback: To benchmark against existing critics, we evaluate two base models (Qwen3-VL-8BThinking and Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking) as a critic
prompted with the zero-shot multidimensional critique prompt from CGI (Yang et al., 2025). We
also compare against GUI-Critic-R1 (Wanyan et al.,
2025), a specialized critic model trained for mobile GUI environments. Further details regarding
prompt configurations and baseline implementations are provided in Appendix A.
Implementation Details. We initialize our critic
with Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking (Qwen Team, 2025)
base model, which is trained for one epoch on the
mixed SFT dataset. Further details regarding train6

ready strong, H I V I G improves its absolute success rate by 15.0%, 3.6%, and 8.4% on WebArenaLitev2, AndroidLab, and WindowsAgentArena,
respectively. These results suggest that limited history state tracking and ineffective error recovery
remain key challenges for CUAs, even when powered by frontier models.

VisAnalysis

HisTrack

Qwen3-VL

G-3-Flash

✗
✓
✗
✓

✗
✗
✓
✓

13.5
21.4
23.4
25.3

30.0
35.1
42.9
45.5

Table 2: Impact of verbal feedback components. Experiments with verbal feedback components of H I V I G
on WebArenaLitev2 evaluated with Qwen3-VL-32B
and Gemini-3-Flash as CUA. VisAnalysis: Visuallygrounded error analysis, HisAnalysis: History state
tracking. Combining two components leads to better
performance.

We observe that H I V I G is particularly beneficial for challenging tasks where existing test-time
interventions often fail. Without an abstractive
macro-action history, policies frequently repeat ineffective commands, as they lack a compressed
record of prior attempts that would allow them to
avoid short-sighted decision loops. Without visually grounded critiques to verify raw execution
coordinates, critics often fail to detect misaligned
actions caused by complex UI elements. In contrast, H I V I G mitigates these failures by maintaining a macro-action history and providing visually
grounded critiques, allowing policies to make decisions anchored in visual content and historical
progress. As a result, it improves performance
on tasks that otherwise remain very difficult, increasing Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking’s success rate
on the WebArenaLitev2 Map category from 3.9%
to 23.1% (Table 6), and Gemini-3-Flash’s success
rate on the WindowsAgentArena Office category
from 4.7% to 23.3% (Table 8).

desktop interfaces. Second, they fail to track historical state, limiting the policy on tasks requiring
long execution trajectories (examples in Figure 1
and Figure 11). Further analysis on the lack of
visual grounding and history state tracking of baseline critics are in Section D.1 and Section D.2.
3.3

Analysis and Ablations

Effectiveness of Individual Components in
H I V I G Framework. To understand the individual contributions of visually grounded error analysis and history state tracking in our framework,
we ablate these components on WebArenaLitev2,
as shown in Table 2. Deploying either component
alone outperforms all baselines. This is especially
notable with the highly-capable Gemini-3-Flash
policy. While prior baselines degrade its performance on WebArenaLitev2 (Table 1), applying our
critic solely with visually grounded error analysis increases its success rate from 30.5% to 35.1%.
Furthermore, deploying history state tracking alone
achieves 23.4% and 42.9% overall success rates for
Qwen3-VL-32B and Gemini-3-Flash, respectively.
By tracking the task progress, this component prevents the policy from falling into short-sighted decision loops and needlessly re-exploring known
states. This independent strength also shows the
computational flexibility of our framework; while
the full pipeline requires two critic inferences per
step, a single inference of either capability is already sufficient to achieve better results. Combining these two within H I V I G yields the highest
overall success rates (25.3% for Qwen3-VL-32BThinking and 45.5% for Gemini-3-Flash), proving
a strong synergistic effect of the two components
that are essential to H I V I G’s superiority. More
detailed analyses of these components are provided
in Section D.3 and Section D.4.

Lack of visual grounding and history conditioning hurts other critics. In Table 1, compared to
our approach, baseline interventions often degrade
frontier model performance, yielding at best a 2.1%
gain on WindowsAgentArena and at worst an 8.4%
drop on WebArenaLitev2 for Gemini-3-Flash. Notably, scalar feedback baselines (OpenCUA and
SE-WSM) yield no performance improvement over
the base agent. This shows a fundamental limit of
scalar rewards: when all candidate actions lead
to silent failures, scalar scores offer no guidance
to improvement. Furthermore, while verbal feedback approaches (CGI, GUI-Critic-R1) offer more
expressive signals, their improvements are highly
inconsistent across domains. For instance, GUICritic-R1 achieves a 5.1% absolute overall success
rate gain on AndroidLab, but only a marginal 0.6%
on WebArenaLitev2, and degrades performance
by 1.3% on WindowsAgentArena. This instability stems from two fundamental limitations: First,
existing critics lack the visual grounding (see a
qualitative example in Figure 10) needed to generalize across the diverse, dense layouts of web and
7

Intent Masking

Visual Marker

WALv2

ALab

✓
✗
✓

✗
✓
✓

20.8
25.3
25.3

46.4
47.1
51.5

However, reliably generating precise future states
in complex GUIs is challenging (Cheng et al., 2025;
Zheng et al., 2026). Moreover, evaluating these
imperfect simulations with outcome-based scalar
rewards risks compounding errors and provides no
path to improvement when all candidate actions are
poor. While some work augments reward models
with external tutorials (Xu et al., 2025a; Mei et al.,
2025) to improve planning, this reliance can limit
generalizability, as such resources are rarely available for proprietary or diverse GUI environments.
In contrast, H I V I G utilizes a computationally efficient 8B model and generalizes across diverse
visual interfaces by relying purely on screenshotlevel visual understanding of the current state.

Table 3: Ablation of visual grounding strategies. We
evaluate the impact of masking the policy’s verbal intent
(30% of SFT samples) and injecting a visual marker (i.e.,
’X’ marker). Combining both strategies forces the critic
to break its text reliance and evaluate the raw spatial
coordinates, yielding visually accurate verbal feedback.
WALv2: WebArenaLitev2, ALab: AndroidLab.

Importance of Visual Grounding. Prior critics often struggle to enforce visual grounding effectively in their training mechanisms and erroneously approve spatially misaligned actions by
over-relying on the policy’s verbal intent. To overcome this, we enforce visual grounding during
Multimodal Rationale Extraction (Step 3) in Section 2.2: masking the verbal intent and injecting a
visual marker on the screenshot. Table 3 demonstrates the efficacy of combining both strategies.
Training without intent masking degrades AndroidLab performance from 51.5% to 47.1%. This exposes a “shortcut” phenomenon; if verbal intent is
consistently available during training, the model
ignores the visual observation, missing critical spatial information. When trained without the visual
marker, performance drops significantly (e.g., from
25.3% to 20.8% on WebArenaLitev2). This indicates that MLLMs struggle to interpret raw numerical coordinates in complex visual interfaces,
and the marker can act as a reliable and effective
spatial anchor to help comprehend the visual semantics of the action. Overall, having both strategies shows the best performance, where the intent
masking breaks text-reliance to force analysis on
the screenshot, while the visual marker provides
spatial anchors needed to verify action execution.
Additionally, we provide the analysis of the importance of state-transition knowledge in Section D.5.

4

Verbal Feedback Critics. In general, scalar feedback offers little guidance to the policy when all
candidate actions are poor. To address this, verbal critics (Xiong et al., 2026) provide naturallanguage critiques (Luo et al., 2025; Zhong et al.,
2024) that help policies refine their trajectories (Wu
et al., 2025; Tang et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025).
This refinement process involves executing an action, observing the environment outcome, and backtracking to correct mistakes. However, generating
critiques after an action is executed is highly impractical in real-world GUIs, as many actions are irreversible (e.g., sending an email or deleting a file).
GUI-Critic-R1 (Wanyan et al., 2025) addresses this,
extending critique generation to the pre-execution
setting, but lacks the visual grounding to verify spatial correctness and does not explicitly reason over
historical interactions. In contrast, H I V I G provide
history-aware, visually grounded critiques by predicting the visual consequence of a proposed action
from the current visual observation and grounding
its assessment in past trajectories, enabling safer
and more reliable test-time decision making.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we introduce H I V I G, a test-time intervention framework that equips CUAs with history
state tracking and visually grounded error analysis. H I V I G leverages a multimodal critic trained to
summarize past interactions that enables policies to
track long-term progress and a visually grounded
critique that intercepts spatial errors before execution by verifying raw execution coordinates against
the screenshot. Evaluations show H I V I G generalizes across web, mobile, and desktop environments,
consistently enhancing frontier models and achiev-

Related work

Reward Models for Scalar Feedback. To mitigate compounding errors in long-horizon GUI
tasks, recent test-time interventions employ reward
models to score candidate actions (Xu et al., 2025a;
Cheng et al., 2025; Mei et al., 2025; Chen et al.,
2025). World-model-style reward models (Chae
et al., 2025a; Bai et al., 2025) predict action outcomes and assign scalar scores to future states.
8

ing average overall success rates by up to 9.0%.
Our ablations confirm a strong synergy between
the two components, proving that history-aware
and visually grounded test-time intervention can
push the performance limits of frontier policies
without modifying their underlying weights.

Web agents with world models: Learning and leveraging environment dynamics in web navigation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).
Hyungjoo Chae, Sunghwan Kim, Junhee Cho, Seungone Kim, Seungjun Moon, Gyeom Hwangbo,
Dongha Lim, Minjin Kim, Yeonjun Hwang, Minju
Gwak, Dongwook Choi, Minseok Kang, Gwanhoon Im, ByeongUng Cho, Hyojun Kim, Jun Hee
Han, Taeyoon Kwon, Minju Kim, Beong-woo Kwak,
Dongjin Kang, and Jinyoung Yeo. 2025b. Webshepherd: Advancing prms for reinforcing web
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15277.

Limitations
While our test-time intervention framework shows
strong performance across diverse policies and GUI
environments, our taxonomy remains bounded by
the current landscape of digital interfaces. Although our 12 predefined dimensions capture the
most prevalent GUI failure modes, the continuous
evolution of digital interfaces and policy capabilities will likely give rise to new classes of spatial
and reasoning errors, necessitating an iterative expansion of the existing taxonomy.

Cong Chen, Kaixiang Ji, Hao Zhong, Muzhi Zhu,
Anzhou Li, Guo Gan, Ziyuan Huang, Cheng Zou,
Jiajia Liu, Jingdong Chen, Hao Chen, and Chunhua
Shen. 2025. Gui-shepherd: Reliable process reward
and verification for long-sequence GUI tasks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.23738.
Jiali Cheng, Anjishnu Kumar, Roshan Lal, Rishi Rajasekaran, Hani Ramezani, Omar Zia Khan, Oleg
Rokhlenko, Sunny Chiu-Webster, Gang Hua, and
Hadi Amiri. 2025. Webatlas: An llm agent with
experience-driven memory and action simulation.
Preprint, arXiv:2510.22732.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF-AI Engage
Institute DRL2112635, NSF-CAREER Award
1846185, ARO Award W911NF2110220, ONR
Grant N00014-23-1-2356, Capital One Research
Award, Apple PhD Fellowship, NDSEG PhD Fellowship. The views contained in this article are
those of the authors and not of the funding agency.

Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen,
Samual Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su.
2023. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the
web. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS).
Gemini Team. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.19786.
Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu,
Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan, and
Dong Yu. 2024. Webvoyager: Building an end-toend web agent with large multimodal models. In
Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand, August 11-16, 2024. Proceedings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL).

References
Ahmed Awadallah, Yash Lara, Raghav Magazine, Hussein Mozannar, Akshay Nambi, Yash Pandya, Aravind Rajeswaran, Corby Rosset, Alexey Taymanov,
Vibhav Vineet, Spencer Whitehead, and Andrew
Zhao. 2025. Fara-7b: An efficient agentic model
for computer use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.19663,
abs/2511.19663.
Hao Bai, Yifei Zhou, Li Erran Li, Sergey Levine, and
Aviral Kumar. 2025. Digi-q: Learning VLM q-value
functions for training device-control agents. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).

Wenyi Hong, Weihan Wang, Qingsong Lv, Jiazheng
Xu, Wenmeng Yu, Junhui Ji, Yan Wang, Zihan Wang,
Yuxiao Dong, Ming Ding, and Jie Tang. 2024. Cogagent: A visual language model for GUI agents. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).

Rogerio Bonatti, Dan Zhao, Francesco Bonacci, Dillon Dupont, Sara Abdali, Yinheng Li, Yadong Lu,
Justin Wagle, Kazuhito Koishida, Arthur Bucker,
Lawrence Keunho Jang, and Zheng Hui. 2025. Windows agent arena: Evaluating multi-modal OS agents
at scale. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).

Chao Jin, Wenkui Yang, Hao Sun, Yuqi Liao, Qianyi
Jiang, Kai Zhou, Jie Cao, Ran He, and Huaibo Huang.
2026. Halluclear: Diagnosing, evaluating and mitigating hallucinations in gui agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.17284.
Jing Yu Koh, Robert Lo, Lawrence Jang, Vikram
Duvvur, Ming Chong Lim, Po-Yu Huang, Graham
Neubig, Shuyan Zhou, Russ Salakhutdinov, and
Daniel Fried. 2024. Visualwebarena: Evaluating
multimodal agents on realistic visual web tasks. In

Hyungjoo Chae, Namyoung Kim, Kai Tzu-iunn Ong,
Minju Gwak, Gwanwoo Song, Jihoon Kim, Sunghwan Kim, Dongha Lee, and Jinyoung Yeo. 2025a.

9

Li, William E. Bishop, Wei Li, Folawiyo CampbellAjala, Daniel Kenji Toyama, Robert James Berry, Divya Tyamagundlu, Timothy P. Lillicrap, and Oriana
Riva. 2025. Androidworld: A dynamic benchmarking environment for autonomous agents. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).

Proceedings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL).
Kaixin Li, Ziyang Meng, Hongzhan Lin, Ziyang Luo,
Yuchen Tian, Jing Ma, Zhiyong Huang, and Tat-Seng
Chua. 2025. Screenspot-pro: GUI grounding for
professional high-resolution computer use. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference
on Multimedia, MM 2025, Dublin, Ireland, October
27-31, 2025.

Luke Rivard, Sun Sun, Hongyu Guo, Wenhu Chen, and
Yuntian Deng. 2025. Neuralos: Towards simulating operating systems via neural generative models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.08800.

Haojia Lin, Xiaoyu Tan, Yulei Qin, Zihan Xu, Yuchen
Shi, Zongyi Li, Gang Li, Shaofei Cai, Siqi Cai,
Chaoyou Fu, Ke Li, and Xing Sun. 2025. Cuarewardbench: A benchmark for evaluating reward
models on computer-using agent. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.18596.

Zeyi Sun, Ziyu Liu, Yuhang Zang, Yuhang Cao, Xiaoyi
Dong, Tong Wu, Dahua Lin, and Jiaqi Wang. 2025.
Seagent: Self-evolving computer use agent with autonomous learning from experience. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.04700.

Zhaoyang Liu, JingJing Xie, Zichen Ding, Zehao Li,
Bowen Yang, Zhenyu Wu, Xuehui Wang, Qiushi Sun,
Shi Liu, Weiyun Wang, Shenglong Ye, Qingyun Li,
Xuan Dong, Yue Yu, Chenyu Lu, YunXiang Mo, Yao
Yan, Zeyue Tian, Xiao Zhang, Yuan Huang, Yiqian
Liu, Weijie Su, Gen Luo, Xiangyu Yue, Biqing Qi,
Kai Chen, Bowen Zhou, Yu Qiao, Qifeng Chen, and
Wenhai Wang. 2026. Scalecua: Scaling open-source
computer use agents with cross-platform data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).

Qiaoyu Tang, Hao Xiang, Le Yu, Bowen Yu, Hongyu
Lin, Yaojie Lu, Xianpei Han, Le Sun, and Junyang Lin. 2025. Refcritic: Training long chainof-thought critic models with refinement feedback.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15024.
Xinyuan Wang, Bowen Wang, Dunjie Lu, Junlin Yang,
Tianbao Xie, Junli Wang, Jiaqi Deng, Xiaole Guo,
Yiheng Xu, Chen Henry Wu, Zhennan Shen, Zhuokai
Li, Ryan Li, Xiaochuan Li, Junda Chen, Boyuan
Zheng, Peihang Li, Fangyu Lei, Ruisheng Cao,
Yeqiao Fu, Dongchan Shin, Martin Shin, Jiarui Hu,
Yuyan Wang, Jixuan Chen, Yuxiao Ye, Danyang
Zhang, Dikang Du, Hao Hu, Huarong Chen, Zaida
Zhou, Haotian Yao, Ziwei Chen, Qizheng Gu, Yipu
Wang, Heng Wang, Diyi Yang, Victor Zhong, Flood
Sung, Y. Charles, Zhilin Yang, and Tao Yu. 2025.
Opencua: Open foundations for computer-use agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09123.

Renjie Luo, Zichen Liu, Xiangyan Liu, Chao Du,
Min Lin, Wenhu Chen, Wei Lu, and Tianyu Pang.
2025. Language models can learn from verbal
feedback without scalar rewards. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.22638.
Kai Mei, Jiang Guo, Shuaichen Chang, Mingwen
Dong, Dongkyu Lee, Xing Niu, and Jiarong
Jiang. 2025. R-wom: Retrieval-augmented world
model for computer-use agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.11892.

Yuyang Wanyan, Xi Zhang, Haiyang Xu, Haowei Liu,
Junyang Wang, Jiabo Ye, Yutong Kou, Ming-Hsuan
Yang, Fei Huang, Xiaoshan Yang, Weiming Dong,
and Changsheng Xu. 2025. Look before you leap:
A gui-critic-r1 model for pre-operative error diagnosis in GUI automation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).

Yuting Ning, Jaylen Jones, Zhehao Zhang, Chentao Ye,
Weitong Ruan, Junyi Li, Rahul Gupta, and Huan
Sun. 2026. When actions go off-task: Detecting and
correcting misaligned actions in computer-use agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08995.

Penghao Wu, Shengnan Ma, Bo Wang, Jiaheng
Yu, Lewei Lu, and Ziwei Liu. 2025.
Guireflection: Empowering multimodal GUI models with self-reflection behavior. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.08012.

Yujia Qin, Yining Ye, Junjie Fang, Haoming Wang,
Shihao Liang, Shizuo Tian, Junda Zhang, Jiahao Li,
Yunxin Li, Shijue Huang, Wanjun Zhong, Kuanye
Li, Jiale Yang, Yu Miao, Woyu Lin, Longxiang Liu,
Xu Jiang, Qianli Ma, Jingyu Li, Xiaojun Xiao, Kai
Cai, Chuang Li, Yaowei Zheng, Chaolin Jin, Chen Li,
Xiao Zhou, Minchao Wang, Haoli Chen, Zhaojian
Li, Haihua Yang, Haifeng Liu, Feng Lin, Tao Peng,
Xin Liu, and Guang Shi. 2025. UI-TARS: pioneering
automated GUI interaction with native agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.12326.

Tao Xiong, Xavier Hu, Yurun Chen, Yuhang Liu,
Changqiao Wu, Pengzhi Gao, Wei Liu, Jian Luan,
and Shengyu Zhang. 2025. GUI-PRA: process
reward agent for GUI tasks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.23263.

Qwen Team. 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2511.21631.

Tianyi Xiong, Shihao Wang, Guilin Liu, Yi Dong, Ming
Li, Heng Huang, Jan Kautz, and Zhiding Yu. 2026.
Phycritic: Multimodal critic models for physical AI.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11124.

Christopher Rawles, Sarah Clinckemaillie, Yifan Chang,
Jonathan Waltz, Gabrielle Lau, Marybeth Fair, Alice

Haiyang Xu, Xi Zhang, Haowei Liu, Junyang Wang,
Zhaozai Zhu, Shengjie Zhou, Xuhao Hu, Feiyu Gao,

10

Junjie Cao, Zihua Wang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jitong Liao,
Qi Zheng, Jiahui Zeng, Ze Xu, Shuai Bai, Junyang
Lin, Jingren Zhou, and Ming Yan. 2026. Mobileagent-v3.5: Multi-platform fundamental GUI agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.16855.

Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou,
Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue
Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. 2024. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).

Ran Xu, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Hongming Zhang,
Joyce C. Ho, Carl Yang, and Dong Yu. 2025a.
Retrieval-augmented GUI agents with generative
guidelines. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP).
Yifan Xu, Xiao Liu, Xueqiao Sun, Siyi Cheng, Hao Yu,
Hanyu Lai, Shudan Zhang, Dan Zhang, Jie Tang, and
Yuxiao Dong. 2025b. Androidlab: Training and systematic benchmarking of android autonomous agents.
In Proceedings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL).
Bowen Yang, Kaiming Jin, Zhenyu Wu, Zhaoyang
Liu, Qiushi Sun, Zehao Li, JingJing Xie, Zhoumianze Liu, Fangzhi Xu, Kanzhi Cheng, Qingyun Li,
Yian Wang, Yu Qiao, Zun Wang, and Zichen Ding.
2026. Os-symphony: A holistic framework for robust
and generalist computer-using agent. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.07779.
Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Chunyuan Li, and Jianfeng Gao. 2023. Set-of-mark
prompting unleashes extraordinary visual grounding
in GPT-4V. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11441.
John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian
Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir
Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces
enable automated software engineering. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Ruihan Yang, Fanghua Ye, Jian Li, Siyu Yuan, Yikai
Zhang, Zhaopeng Tu, Xiaolong Li, and Deqing
Yang. 2025. The lighthouse of language: Enhancing
LLM agents via critique-guided improvement. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2511.21631.
Yao Zhang, Shijie Tang, Zeyu Li, Zhen Han, and Volker
Tresp. 2026. Webarbiter: A principle-guided reasoning process reward model for web agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2601.21872.
Yaowei Zheng, Richong Zhang, Junhao Zhang, Yanhan
Ye, Zheyan Luo, Zhangchi Feng, and Yongqiang Ma.
2024. Llamafactory: Unified efficient fine-tuning
of 100+ language models. In Proceedings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL).
Yuhao Zheng, Li’an Zhong, Yi Wang, Rui Dai, Kaikui
Liu, Xiangxiang Chu, Linyuan Lv, Philip Torr, and
Kevin Qinghong Lin. 2026. Code2world: A GUI
world model via renderable code generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.09856.
Victor Zhong, Dipendra Misra, Xingdi Yuan, and MarcAlexandre Côté. 2024. Policy improvement using
language feedback models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).

11

A

Details of Experimental Setups

prompt configurations used in our experiments.
• OpenCUA (Wang et al., 2025) originally employs a strong proprietary model (e.g., Claude) as
a step reflector in their chain-of-thought data annotation pipeline. It generates reflections based
on previous step reasoning and current screenshots. To avoid coupling complexities and ensure a fair comparative evaluation, we simplify
their reflector prompt into a standard Process Reward Model (PRM) template. Given the prompt,
Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking base model outputs a
scalar quality score.

Training Dataset. To construct the SFT datasets
for our critic, we use the ScaleCUA (Liu et al.,
2026) training corpus as source data that contains
multi-domain GUI trajectories, including web, mobile, and desktop. We employ Qwen3-VL-32BThinking as the MLLM annotator to extract the
multimodal rationale for error analysis and generate the macro-action history. The resulting training
data contains 52k mixed SFT samples: 20k samples for the history state tracking task, and 32k
samples for the visually grounded error analysis
task, containing 16k samples for expert actions and
16k samples for perturbed actions.

• SE-WSM (Sun et al., 2025) conducts a comprehensive, step-by-step analysis of input trajectories, providing multidimensional evaluations that
cover trajectory correctness, the identification of
redundant steps, the first error step, and correct
action suggestions. We adapt SE-WSM’s dense
prompt template for our scalar feedback baseline to evaluate candidate actions in a Best-of-N
search, also utilizing Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking as
the base evaluator.

Evaluation Benchmarks. We provide in-depth
explanations of the cross-platform GUI navigation
benchmarks used in our experiments, following the
evaluation setups in Liu et al. (2026). For the web
environment, WebArenaLitev2 (Liu et al., 2026)
serves as a vision-centric adaptation of the WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024) framework, consisting
of 154 tasks that span diverse interactive websites,
including online shopping, content management
platforms, map services, GitLab, and Reddit. To
assess mobile GUI control, AndroidLab (Xu et al.,
2025b) utilizes a pixel-grounded visual interaction
mode to test true spatial understanding, evaluating
agents across 138 complex tasks distributed over
9 native applications such as the calendar, clock,
contacts, map, and settings. Finally, for the desktop
environment, WindowsAgentArena (Bonatti et al.,
2025) tests agents within a fully functional Windows 11 virtual machine across 145 diverse tasks.
We chose a 30-step execution horizon as an intermediate setting between the shorter 15-step horizons
and the 50-step limits in the previous paper (Liu
et al., 2026; Yang et al., 2026), which allows us to
evaluate the policy’s ability to solve long-horizon
tasks without high costs. To thoroughly evaluate performance across varying operational complexities, we follow the functional categorization
in Yang et al. (2026), grouping these tasks into six
specific Windows OS application scenarios: Office,
Web Browsing, Windows System, Code, Media,
and Windows Utilities. ScaleCUA and WebArenaLiteV2 are released under the Apache 2.0 License, and AndroidLab and WindowsAgentArena
are released under the MIT License.

• CGI (Yang et al., 2025) is a zero-shot critique
generation framework. We implement this by
prompting our base models (Qwen3-VL-8BThinking and Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking) to systematically analyze the proposed action across
three explicit dimensions: Contribution (task
progress), Feasibility (validity within the action
space), and Efficiency (optimality without redundancy). This structured analysis is then provided as verbal feedback to contextually guide
the agent’s error recovery.
• GUI-Critic-R1 (Wanyan et al., 2025) is a specialized, open-source critic model explicitly trained
to generate fine-grained verbal feedback for mobile GUI environments. We utilize it as a supervised baseline to compare our zero-shot and
test-time scaling approaches against a model that
has been directly optimized for trajectory critique
and error identification.
Implementation Details.
We implement our training framework using the
LlamaFactory (Zheng et al., 2024) recipes
on 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs (80GB). The model is
optimized for 1 epoch using a cosine learning rate
schedule with a peak learning rate of 5e-6 and a
global batch size of 256, taking approximately 4
hours to train. During test-time deployment, we

Baselines. We provide a more detailed explanation of the baseline models and their specific
12

evaluate the benchmarks using 8 NVIDIA H100
GPUs (80GB). We set the history window sizes to
W = 4 and W = 2 for Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking
and Gemini-3-Flash, respectively, following their
official computer-use frameworks (Qwen Team,
2025; Gemini Team, 2025). All experimental
results are from a single run, due to heavy compute
costs for long-horizon GUI tasks.

B

fails physical vector execution (Rawles et al.,
2025). It either reasons the exact opposite direction of the goal (Polarity Reversal, e.g., the
wrong mathematical sign for scrolling) or uses
an insufficient scale, resulting in negligible UI
movement (Magnitude Insufficiency).
• Action-Operation Misalignment: The verbalized intent contradicts the executable JSON
string. The reasoned action description is logical, but the actual generated action execution is
invalid (Liu et al., 2026).

Complete Taxonomy of Synthesized
Error Dimensions

To ensure our critic learns to detect and recover
from a comprehensive set of failure modes, we
synthesize plausible errors that mirror the actual
mistakes made by standard Computer Use Agents
(CUAs). Rather than relying on arbitrary perturbations, our taxonomy is empirically based in the
primary failure modes observed across recent agent
evaluations and benchmarks. We categorize our 12
error dimensions into two core vulnerabilities of
CUAs, directly addressing the limitations outlined
in our methodology: Visual and Spatial Grounding
and Cognitive Execution. The distribution of these
error dimensions within our constructed training
data is illustrated in Figure 4. Additionally, comprehensive examples for each error dimension are
provided across Figures 12 to 17.

Cognitive and Step-Level Execution Errors
These errors occur when the agent successfully
perceives the screen but fails to reason about the
correct immediate action, format, or sequence.
• Termination Misjudgment: The agent misjudges task completion. It either prematurely
outputs a terminate command, fails to explicitly report required data using the answer tool, or
hallucinates redundant steps long after the goal
has been met (Wang et al., 2025).
• Procedural Prerequisite Neglect: The agent
skips a mandatory preceding state change, such
as failing to focus a field before typing or failing to dismiss a foreground overlay blocking the
target (Zhou et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025).

Visual and Spatial Grounding Errors These
errors occur when the policy’s logical reasoning
is disconnected from the actual visual reality of
the current GUI state, a persistent bottleneck in
MLLMs interacting with raw screenshots.

• Semantic Error: The agent targets perfectly but
misinterprets vocabulary, icons, or UI paradigms
(e.g., clicking “Sign Up” instead of “Log In”, or
clicking a deceptive ad) (Deng et al., 2023)

• Grounding/Spatial Error: The semantic intent
is correct, but coordinate precision fails. The
agent near-misses the target, landing in adjacent
dead space (e.g., a minor pixel offset just outside
the bounding box). This is a well-documented
failure mode in unconstrained coordinate environments (Li et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025).

• Constraint Neglect: The agent ignores a specific
attribute or positional constraint explicitly stated
in the goal (e.g., selecting the wrong author or
wrong position) (Liu et al., 2026).
• Action Formulation Error: The intent is correct, but the generated JSON crashes the parser
due to syntax errors (e.g., missing quotes, trailing
commas) or missing required arguments/invalid
enums (Yang et al., 2024).

• Visual Hallucination: The agent interacts with
a non-existent UI element, such as targeting a
ghost element from a previous state or guessing
a layout coordinate based on parametric priors
rather than visual evidence (Jin et al., 2026).

• Suboptimal Path: The agent selects highly
inefficient micro-actions (e.g., repetitive arrow or backspace clicks) instead of standard,
faster paradigms (e.g., direct text entry, bulk
delete) (Zhou et al., 2024).

• Observation Neglect: The agent attempts to
search, scroll, or open menus for target elements
that are already clearly visible on the current
screen (Jin et al., 2026).

• Timing and Latency Neglect: The agent executes an action prematurely, ignoring system
busy indicators like loading spinners, unfolding

• Parameter Vector Miscalibration: The agent
13

Distribution of Synthesized Perturbed Action Error Types
Visual Hallucination
Parameter Vector Miscalibration
Action-Operation Misalignment
Semantic Error
Grounding/Spatial Error
Termination Misjudgment
Constraint Neglect
Memory & State Tracking Error
Procedural Prerequisite Neglect
Action Formulation Error
Suboptimal Path
1.3%
Observation Neglect
Timing and Latency Neglect 0.0%
0
2

5.6%
5.1%

4

6

8.8%
8.1%
7.3%
7.2%

8

Frequency (%)

10.3%
10.1%
9.7%

10

14.9%

11.6%

12

14

Figure 4: Distribution of synthesized error types. We show the distribution of error types within the training
dataset for the visually grounded error analysis task.

menus, or disabled buttons.

C

the exact execution coordinates, which helps the
critic to verify the actual UI element being targeted.
This allows it to immediately detect the contradiction between the stated intent and the visual reality,
correctly detecting an “Action-Operation Misalignment” error and providing verbal feedback to the
policy to prevent a costly misnavigation.

Computer Use Agent Action Space

To ensure reproducibility, we provide the exact
JSON schemas that detail the action spaces, which
are adapted from Qwen3-VL (Qwen Team, 2025).
for both desktop and mobile environments, as
shown in Figure 8 and Figure 9. Across all platforms, the visual observation is normalized to a
standardized 1000 × 1000 coordinate grid. By establishing this unified continuous pixel space and
action grammar, we ensure that both the underlying policies and our test-time critic can generalize
their interactions and visually grounded evaluations
across diverse GUI environments, independent of
the host operating system.

D

Additional Experiments

D.1

Lack of Visual Grounding in Previous
Critics

D.2

Lack of History State Tracking in
Previous Critics

In Figure 11, we illustrate a failure case where
the baseline critic, GUI-Critic-R1 (Wanyan et al.,
2025), fails to account for task history, whereas
H I V I G-critic successfully leverages its macroaction history to rectify the agent’s behavior. In
this scenario, the agent intends to open a direction
planner but performs an incorrect click that fails
to trigger the navigation interface. Because the
baseline critic lacks a mechanism to track history
states, it erroneously labels the action as “Correct”
and fails to provide any corrective guidance. This
lack of state awareness leaves the policy forget its
previous mistake, leading it to repeat the same ineffective click. In contrast, our critic maintains a
macro-action history that logs history states across
multiple interactions by the policy. Providing this
marco-action history, our critic allows the policy
to recogize the past failure, allowing the policy to
make more history-aware decisions to avoid making the same mistake. This demonstrates that history tracking is essential to guide the policy in
long-horizon GUI tasks.

In Figure 10, we provide an example where ungrounded GUI-Critic-R1 (Wanyan et al., 2025)
failed to capture the spatial error while H I V I Gcritic captures the error. In this scenario, the policy
proposes an action with a logically correct textual
intent (“Click on the Sales menu”) to fulfill the
user’s instruction, but outputs incorrect spatial coordinates that actually target the adjacent “Catalog”
icon. As GUI-Critic-R1 lacks explicit spatial verification, it over-relies on the agent’s verbalized
intent. It assumes the text aligns with the spatial
execution, leading it to hallucinate a successful outcome and erroneously approve the flawed action.
In contrast, H I V I G-critic uses a visual marker on
14

HiViG
Only

HiViG (Combined)
HiViG (Combined) Success

Figure 5: Task-level success overlap of H I V I G components. We visualize the success patterns of the base agent,
HisTrack (history state tracking) alone, VisAnalysis (visually grounded error analysis) alone, and the combined
H I V I G framework across all tasks in WebArenaLitev2 solvable by at least one configuration. We use Qwen3-VL32B-Thinking as the CUA. The presence of distinct tasks uniquely solvable by HisTrack (9 tasks) or VisAnalysis
(7 tasks) demonstrates that the two components resolve orthogonal failure modes. The combined framework
successfully inherits these independent capabilities—alongside 6 tasks fixed by both—retaining the vast majority of
individual fixes. Furthermore, the combined approach exhibits emergent synergy by uniquely solving 4 tasks that all
other configurations failed, achieving the highest overall success rate.
VisAnalysis

HisTrack

Overall

Separate H I V I G
Separate H I V I G
Separate H I V I G

Separate H I V I G
Qwen3-VL-8B
Qwen3-VL-32B

23.4
24.7
25.3

Mixed training H I V I G (Ours)

of the base Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking and Qwen3VL-32B-Thinking models, where the latter is the
annotator model, we observe that the 32B model
achieves 25.3% overall success rate. Our mixedtrained 8B model matches this performance, confirming that our mixed SFT approach successfully
distills the history state tracking of the 32B annotator into an efficient, unified 8B critic, minimizing
inference overhead without sacrificing accuracy.
Finally, we analyze the impact of training duration. We compare H I V I G-critic trained for a single
epoch, which is our default configuration, against
a model trained for two epochs with our mixed
dataset. Performance remains highly competitive
between the two. The default setting achieves
25.3% and 51.5% on WebArenaLitev2 and AndroidLab, respectively, while the two-epoch model
reaches 24.7% and 52.2%. This consistency across
training durations demonstrates that our framework
achieves robust performance with minimal training
overhead.

25.3

Table 4: Ablation on critic training. We compare the
overall success rate of a unified 8B critic trained on
a mixed dataset (Mixed training H I V I G) against separately trained 8B critics (Separate H I V I G) and zeroshot baselines that use Qwen3-VL models for historical
progress grounding across WebArenaLitev2. VisAnalysis: Visually grounded error analysis, HisTrack: Historical state tracking. Both Qwen3-VL-8B and Qwen3VL-32B are thinking models.

D.3

Impact of Mixed Dataset Training and
Training Efficiency

We ablate the training data composition by comparing a single critic trained on the mixed dataset
against maintaining separate models for each capability, isolating the contribution of each component. As shown in Table 4, training two separate
8B critics (one exclusively for visually grounded
error analysis dataset and another for history state
tracking dataset) yields a suboptimal overall success rate of 23.4% on WebArenaLitev2. In contrast,
jointly training a single model on the mixed dataset
increases performance to 25.3%. This improvement suggests that visually grounded error analysis and history state tracking are synergic tasks,
as they both require pixel-level understanding of
GUI screenshots and state-transitions. Thus, cotraining might provide complementary supervisory
signals that enhance the model’s overall visual reasoning. Furthermore, when substituting our critic
with the zero-shot history state tracking capabilities

D.4

Synergistic Effects of H I V I G’s Two Core
Components

To further understand how visually grounded error analysis and history state tracking components
combine in H I V I G framework, we analyze the tasklevel success of the base agent, visually grounded
error analysis, history state tracking, and H I V I G
on WebArenaLitev2 when using Qwen3-VL-32BThinking as an agent. As illustrated in Figure 5,
each component independently solves a unique
subset of tasks that the base agent cannot, demonstrating that they address orthogonal failure modes.
These independent capabilities are largely inherited by the combined H I V I G framework, which
successfully retains the unique fixes from both in15

Intent Masking Ratio

WALv2

ALab

Avg.

D.6

0%
30%
50%

25.3
25.3
26.0

47.1
51.5
49.3

36.2
38.4
37.7

dividual components. This synergistic effect is
also evident in the Gemini-3-Flash experiments on
WebArenaLitev2. While visually grounded error
analysis alone yields a comparably smaller performance increase (from 30.5% to 35.1%) compared to the gains from history state tracking alone
(from 30.5% to 42.9%), integrating both components achieves the highest overall success rate of
45.5%. This shows that even when history state
tracking acts as the primary driver of performance
gains in long-horizon tasks, visually grounded error
analysis reliably resolves distinct, complementary
errors, making their combination essential for maximizing the agent’s overall capabilities.

To encourage visual grounding, we incorporate intent masking during data construction. We evaluate
the sensitivity of our framework to this hyperparameter by comparing our default 30% masking
ratio against 0% (no masking) and 50% masking.
As shown in Table 5, while increasing the masking ratio to 50% yields marginal gains on WebArenaLitev2 (26.0%), it leads to a performance drop on
AndroidLab (49.3%). Conversely, the absence of
intent masking (0%) results in lower performance
across both benchmarks compared to our default
setting. These results demonstrate that while intent
masking is essential for enhancing the critic’s visual grounding capabilities, our 30% masking ratio
provides the most balanced and competitive performance across diverse GUI environments. The performance decline at higher masking ratios (50%)
potentially be due to a distributional shift between
training and test-time inputs. While we employ intent masking during training to force visual grounding, the critic receives unmasked intent actions at
test time. Excessive masking during training increases the discrepancy between the training distribution and the test-time objective, causing the critic
to struggle to fully understand the given actions.

D.5

D.7

Table 5: Ablation on intent masking. We evaluate the
impact of the intent masking ratio for visual grounding.
While a 50% mask yields slight improvements on WebArenaLitev2, the 30% ratio provides the most robust
and balanced performance across platforms. WALv2:
WebArenaLitev2, ALab: AndroidLab. Avg.: average
overall success rate.

Impact of State-transitions

In our data construction pipeline, multimodal rationale grounds the action’s consequence in GUI
environments by providing the annotator with the
ground-truth verbalized state-transition (vt ) derived
from the actual execution tuple (ot , at , ot+1 ). To
validate the impact of grounding multimodal rationale on the state-transition, we ablate this component by denying the annotator access to vt , instead
letting the annotator predict the state-transition
based on its internal parametric knowledge like
GUI-Critic-R1 (Wanyan et al., 2025). Training our
critic on this ablation dataset causes a performance
drop: the overall success rate falls from 25.3% to
20.8% on WebArenaLitev2. This degradation highlights the difficulty of acting as a reliable world
model in complex GUI environments. Without
grounding in actual visual outcomes, the annotator
frequently hallucinates incorrect state-transitions,
distilling these inaccuracies into the trained critic.
This demonstrates that extracting and learning from
verified, ground-truth state-transitions is important
to bypass the hallucination issues that can limit
prior baseline critics.

Impact of Intent Masking

Failure Case Analysis

While H I V I G framework significantly improves
history awareness and error recovery for policies
across diverse domains, our qualitative analysis reveals failure modes stemming from the model’s
capacity limit in fine-grained visual discrimination. First, during visually grounded error analysis, the critic occasionally misses nuanced visual
discrepancies. For instance, when an agent is instructed to draw a “red” circle in Windows Paint
but erroneously targets the “dark red” color option, H I V I G fails to detect this error. This indicates that while the critic excels at broad visual
grounding, it can struggle with highly precise visual feature recognition, such as subtle color variations. Second, during history state tracking, the
critic can sometimes generate inaccurate multi-step
achieved goals due to textual bias. For instance,
when the agent attempted to delete an alarm in a
mobile environment, the executed action merely
hided the alarm’s detailed configuration view, leaving the alarm itself present on the screen. However,
mistaking this hidden view for a deleted state, the
critic incorrectly recorded a successful deletion in
16

its compressed macro-action history. Ultimately,
both failure modes underscore the need for a more
fine-grained understanding of visual features and
state-to-state GUI dynamics, suggesting room for
further improvements to our test-time intervention
framework to continue pushing the performance
limits of policies.
D.8

Detailed performance

Table 6, Table 7, and Table 8 show detailed performance of WebArenaliteV2, AndroidLab, and
WindowsAgentArena benchmarks, respectively.

E

Large Language Model (LLM) Use

In our research, we employed LLMs for training
data construction and writing assistance. During
writing, LLMs were utilized for sentence-level
refinement and grammatical polishing. All AIgenerated suggestions were carefully reviewed and
edited by the authors to maintain the coherency and
accuracy.

17

Method

Admin

GitLab

Shopping

Map

Reddit

Overall

Computer Use Agent: Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking
Base agent

11.4

16.7

15.9

3.9

15.8

13.0

OpenCUA
SE-WSM

14.3
11.4

16.7
16.7

20.5
15.9

3.9
3.9

15.8
5.3

14.9
11.7

CGI (32B)
CGI (8B)
GUI-Critic-R1

17.1
14.3
14.3

16.7
13.3
13.3

25.0
13.6
15.9

3.9
3.9
3.9

15.8
15.8
21.1

16.9
12.3
13.6

H I V I G (Ours)

28.6

13.3

31.8

23.1

26.3

25.3

Computer Use Agent: Gemini-3-Flash
Base agent

25.7

56.7

25.0

19.2

26.3

30.5

OpenCUA
SE-WSM

22.9
25.7

53.3
53.3

22.7
31.8

23.1
23.1

31.6
10.5

29.9
30.5

CGI (32B)
CGI (8B)
GUI-Critic-R1

37.1
17.1
8.6

33.3
50.0
36.7

31.8
25.0
27.3

19.2
11.5
15.4

21.1
31.6
21.1

29.9
26.6
22.1

H I V I G (Ours)

42.9

70.0

38.6

34.6

42.1

45.5

Table 6: Comparison of test-time intervention methods on Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking and Gemini-3-Flash in
WebArenalitev2 benchmark.

Method

Bluecoins Calendar Cantook Clock Contacts Map Pimusic Setting Zoom Overall
Computer Use Agent: Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking

Base agent

20.0

35.7

33.3

74.1

53.3

6.7

16.7

69.6

40.0

44.2

OpenCUA
SE-WSM

33.3
20.0

28.6
42.9

41.7
41.7

70.4
70.4

53.3
53.3

6.7
13.3

25.0
8.3

73.9
69.6

60.0
60.0

47.1
45.7

CGI (32B)
CGI (8B)
GUI-Critic-R1

26.7
26.7
40.0

42.9
42.9
42.9

33.3
25.0
16.7

74.1
77.8
77.9

53.3
53.3
53.3

6.7
0.0
13.3

33.3
16.7
25.0

76.5
69.6
73.9

0.0
20.0
60.0

46.9
44.2
49.3

H I V I G (Ours)

40.0

42.9

50.0

70.4

60.0

13.3

16.7

78.3

60.0

51.5

Computer Use Agent: Gemini-3-Flash
Base agent

66.7

42.9

75.0

74.1

53.3

13.3

25.0

78.3

80.0

58.0

OpenCUA
SE-WSM

60.0
53.3

42.9
42.9

50.0
58.3

81.5
77.9

26.7
40.0

40.0
40.0

33.3
33.3

78.3
73.9

80.0
80.0

57.2
57.2

CGI (32B)
CGI (8B)
GUI-Critic-R1

60.0
60.0
60.0

42.9
35.7
42.9

50.0
58.3
50.0

74.1
88.9
66.7

33.3
26.7
46.7

40.0
26.7
26.7

33.3
33.3
25.0

78.3
73.9
73.9

60.0
40.0
80.0

55.8
55.1
53.6

H I V I G (Ours)

73.3

42.9

50.0

88.9

40.0

40.0

33.3

78.3

80.0

61.6

Table 7: Comparison of test-time intervention methods on Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking and Gemini-3-Flash in
AndroidLab benchmark.

18

Method

Office Web Browsing Windows System Code Media Windows Utilities Overall
Computer Use Agent: Qwen3-VL-32B-Thnking

Base agent

4.7

57.1

50.0

58.3

27.7

50.0

35.7

OpenCUA
SE-WSM

2.3
2.3

61.9
52.4

70.8
58.3

50.0
50.0

24.5
22.9

25.0
25.0

35.2
31.6

CGI (32B)
CGI (8B)
GUI-Critic-R1

4.7
4.7
4.7

47.6
47.6
61.9

58.3
58.3
45.8

50.0
41.7
54.2

37.2
28.1
28.1

25.0
25.0
41.7

33.7
31.0
34.4

H I V I G (Ours)

7.0

57.1

58.3

58.3

28.9

50.0

38.0

Computer Use Agent: Gemini-3-Flash
Base agent

4.7

52.4

58.3

45.8

32.9

58.3

35.8

OpenCUA
SE-WSM

4.7
4.7

52.4
42.9

58.3
62.5

45.8
45.8

32.9
28.1

58.3
66.7

35.8
35.1

CGI (32B)
CGI (8B)
GUI-Critic-R1

4.7
4.7
2.3

47.6
57.1
57.1

62.5
62.5
58.3

58.3
54.2
45.8

32.9
37.7
19.3

50.0
41.7
41.7

37.9
37.9
32.5

H I V I G (Ours)

23.3

57.1

62.5

54.2

28.9

66.7

44.2

Table 8: Comparison of test-time intervention methods on Qwen3-VL-32B-Thinking and Gemini-3-Flash in
WindowsAgentArena benchmark.

System Prompt of History State Tracking
You are the Macro-Strategy and Reflection module for a GUI navigation agent. Your task is to analyze the agent's recent action, perform a
visual diff, and synthesize a strategic summary that explicitly connects the current visual state to the User Instruction.
### Task Description
You will be provided with:
- User Instruction (Goal): The overall, high-level task the user wants the agent to accomplish.
- Previous Summary: The memory bank from the last turn.
- Previous Observation: The screenshot visual representation of the screen BEFORE the proposed step.
- Previous Proposed Step: The combined verbalized intent (Action: ...) and the executable command (<tool_call>...</tool_call>) previously
suggested by the agent for the previous observation.
- Current Observation: The screenshot visual representation of the screen AFTER the proposed step.
Your task is to act as a summary model. You must determine if the agent's current trajectory is actively converging on the User Instruction.
### Action Space
{platform_action_space}
### Output Format
You must strictly follow this exact structure. Before outputting the final summary, you must reason through the visual state and logical
deduction step-by-step inside a <think> block.
<think>
In your monologue, you must naturally flow through these logical steps:
- Perform a fast visual diff. State the 'Previous Proposed Step', compare the 'Previous Observation' to the 'Current Observation', and explicitly
describe exactly what changed physically on the screen. Definitively conclude whether the 'Previous Proposed Step' resulted in a UI update
or a silent failure.
- Map the verified 'Current Observation' to the 'User Instruction (Goal)'. Identify the visual gap: what goal-related UI elements are currently
present, and what are missing?
</think>
<summary>
Progress Summary: [LONG TERM MEMORY: Synthesize the 'Previous Summary' with the current result. Compress completed micro-steps
into dense macro-achievements (e.g., "Successfully logged in"). Only append the new action if it succeeded.]
Last Action Result: [SHORT TERM MEMORY: An objective, static description of exactly what the last action accomplished visually.]
</summary>

Figure 6: Input prompt for H I V I G for history state tracking at test-time.

19

System Prompt of Visually Grounded Error Analysis
You are an expert GUI Environment Simulator and Action Critic for a GUI navigation agent.
### Task Description
# You will be provided with:
- User Instruction (Goal): The overall, high-level task the user wants the agent to accomplish.
- Trajectory: A sequential record of the agent's past proposed steps.
- Current Observation: The screenshot visual representation of the current screen. **Note: IF the agent's proposed step involves spatial
coordinates, a visual marker (red 'X' or blue arrow) has been injected into this image. If the action is non-spatial (e.g., type, wait), the image is
clean.**
- Current Proposed Step: The combined verbalized intent (Action: ...) and the executable command (<tool_call>...</tool_call>) suggested by
the agent for the current observation.
Your task is to predict the physical and logical consequences of the agent's action and provide goal-oriented environmental feedback so the
agent can deduce the correct action itself.
### Action Space
{platform_action_space}
### Error Dimension Taxonomy
{error_dimension_str}
### Output Format
You must strictly follow this exact structure. Before predicting the final evaluation, you must reason through the visual state and logical
deduction step-by-step inside a <think> block.
<think>
In your monologue, you must naturally flow through these logical steps:
In your first paragraph, start exactly with this format: "Action String Check: [Insert the EXACT raw <tool_call> string here] - Syntax is
[Valid/Invalid]." (Note any JSON parsing errors if invalid).
**CRITICAL VISUAL GROUNDING:** Next, you MUST evaluate ALL `<tool_call>` blocks in the 'Current Proposed Step' based on the
arguments provided in the JSON.
- **If ANY tool call contains `coordinate` arguments (e.g., click, swipe, mouse_move):** The coordinates perfectly match the injected visual
marker. Locate the **red 'X' marker** or the **blue arrow**. To prevent spatial hallucinations, you must perform a strict, literal visual scan:
1. **Literal Center:** First, read the exact text or identify the specific icon located directly beneath the exact center intersection of the
marker.
2. **Adjacency Check:** Identify the elements immediately adjacent (left/right/above/below) to the marker.
3. **Final Identification:** Based strictly on the literal center, explicitly describe exactly what UI element (or empty space) is targeted. (e.g.,
"The X is directly on the 'Subscribe' text, adjacent to the '0' counter. Therefore, it targets the Subscribe button, not the counter.")
- **If NO tool calls in the 'Current Proposed Step' contain `coordinate` arguments (e.g., ONLY scroll, type, key, wait, terminate):** You are
STRICTLY FORBIDDEN from looking for or mentioning a red 'X' or blue arrow. **CRITICAL WARNING: If you see a red 'X' in the image during a
non-coordinate action, it is a residual artifact from a previous step. You MUST completely ignore it.** Evaluate the global screen state and the
logical parameters provided in the 'Current Proposed Step' JSON.
Next, analyze the 'Trajectory' against the 'User Instruction (Goal)' to establish the current progress state.
Finally, if a verbal intent (Action: ...) is provided, explicitly compare what the agent claims it is doing against the visual reality you just
observed in the context of this current state, calling out any contradictions. If no verbal intent is provided, explicitly state what UI element the
action targets in the context of the current state.
In your second paragraph, using your knowledge of GUI interfaces, predict exactly what will physically happen to the UI layout if this specific
action is executed. Use forward-predictive future tense.
In your third paragraph, compare your predicted consequence directly to the 'User Instruction (Goal)'. You must organically deduce why this
predicted structural UI change succeeds or fails. If it succeeds, conclude 'Good'. If it fails, conclude 'Bad', state the matching 'Target Error
Dimension', and explain the UI physics rule that the agent violated.
</think>
<criticism>
[If the action is correct, output exactly this format:]
Overall Grading: Good
Explanation: [Describe the immediate physical/structural consequence of this action in the future tense. Then, explicitly state the universal
UI rule or environmental mechanic that makes this interaction successful.]
[If the action is flawed, output exactly this format:]
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: [You MUST select the exact matching category from the Error Dimension Taxonomy above].
Explanation: [Describe the immediate physical/structural consequence of the flawed action in the future tense. Then, state the universal UI
rule the agent violated, and explain the correct environmental mechanic required for this type of interaction.]
</criticism>

Figure 7: Input prompt for H I V I G for visually-grounded error analysis at test-time.

20

Desktop GUI Action Space
<tools>
{"type": "function", "function": {"name": "computer_use", "description": "Use a mouse and keyboard to interact with a computer, and take
screenshots.
* This is an interface to a desktop GUI. You do not have access to a terminal or applications menu. You must click on desktop icons to start
applications.
* Some applications may take time to start or process actions, so you may need to wait and take successive screenshots to see the results
of your actions. E.g. if you click on Firefox and a window doesn't open, try wait and taking another screenshot.
* The screen's resolution is 1000x1000.
* Make sure to click any buttons, links, icons, etc with the cursor tip in the center of the element. Don't click boxes on their edges unless
asked.", "parameters": {"properties": {"action": {"description": "The action to perform. The available actions are:
* `key`: Performs key down presses on the arguments passed in order, then performs key releases in reverse order.
* `type`: Type a string of text on the keyboard.
* `mouse_move`: Move the cursor to a specified (x, y) pixel coordinate on the screen.
* `left_click`: Click the left mouse button at a specified (x, y) pixel coordinate on the screen.
* `left_click_drag`: Click and drag the cursor to a specified (x, y) pixel coordinate on the screen.
* `right_click`: Click the right mouse button at a specified (x, y) pixel coordinate on the screen.
* `middle_click`: Click the middle mouse button at a specified (x, y) pixel coordinate on the screen.
* `double_click`: Double-click the left mouse button at a specified (x, y) pixel coordinate on the screen.
* `triple_click`: Triple-click the left mouse button at a specified (x, y) pixel coordinate on the screen.
* `scroll`: Performs a scroll of the mouse scroll wheel.
* `hscroll`: Performs a horizontal scroll.
* `wait`: Wait specified seconds for the change to happen.
* `terminate`: Terminate the current task and report its completion status.
* `answer`: Answer a question.
* `interact`: Resolve the blocking window by interacting with the user.", "enum": ["key", "type", "mouse_move", "left_click", "left_click_drag",
"right_click", "middle_click", "double_click", "triple_click", "scroll", "hscroll", "wait", "terminate", "answer", "interact"], "type": "string"}, "keys":
{"description": "Required only by `action=key`.", "type": "array"}, "text": {"description": "Required only by `action=type`, `action=answer`
and `action=interact`.", "type": "string"}, "coordinate": {"description": "(x, y): The x (pixels from the left edge) and y (pixels from the top edge)
coordinates to move the mouse to. Required only by `action=mouse_move` and `action=left_click_drag`.", "type": "array"}, "pixels":
{"description": "The amount of scrolling to perform. Positive values scroll up, negative values scroll down. Required only by `action=scroll`
and `action=hscroll`.", "type": "number"}, "time": {"description": "The seconds to wait. Required only by `action=wait`.", "type": "number"},
"status": {"description": "The status of the task. Required only by `action=terminate`.", "type": "string", "enum": ["success", "failure"]}},
"required": ["action"], "type": "object"}}}
</tools>

Figure 8: Action space definition in desktop (e.g., web, WindowsOS, MacOS) GUI environments.

Mobile GUI Action Space
<tools>
{"type": "function", "function": {"name_for_human": "mobile_use", "name": "mobile_use", "description": "Use a touchscreen to interact with a
mobile device, and take screenshots.
* This is an interface to a mobile device with touchscreen. You can perform actions like clicking, typing, swiping, etc.
* Some applications may take time to start or process actions, so you may need to wait and take successive screenshots to see the results
of your actions.
* The screen's resolution is 1000x1000.
* Make sure to click any buttons, links, icons, etc with the cursor tip in the center of the element. Don't click boxes on their edges unless
asked.", "parameters": {"properties": {"action": {"description": "The action to perform. The available actions are:
* `key`: Perform a key event on the mobile device.
- This supports adb's `keyevent` syntax.
- Examples: \"volume_up\", \"volume_down\", \"power\", \"camera\", \"clear\".
* `click`: Click the point on the screen with coordinate (x, y).
* `long_press`: Press the point on the screen with coordinate (x, y) for specified seconds.
* `swipe`: Swipe from the starting point with coordinate (x, y) to the end point with coordinates2 (x2, y2).
* `type`: Input the specified text into the activated input box.
* `system_button`: Press the system button.
* `open`: Open an app on the device.
* `wait`: Wait specified seconds for the change to happen.
* `answer`: Terminate the current task and output the answer.
* `interact`: Resolve the blocking window by interacting with the user.
* `terminate`: Terminate the current task and report its completion status.", "enum": ["key", "click", "long_press", "swipe", "type",
"system_button", "open", "wait", "answer", "interact", "terminate"], "type": "string"}, "coordinate": {"description": "(x, y): The x (pixels from the
left edge) and y (pixels from the top edge) coordinates to move the mouse to. Required only by `action=click`, `action=long_press`, and
`action=swipe`.", "type": "array"}, "coordinate2": {"description": "(x, y): The x (pixels from the left edge) and y (pixels from the top edge)
coordinates to move the mouse to. Required only by `action=swipe`.", "type": "array"}, "text": {"description": "Required only by `action=key`,
`action=type`, `action=open`, `action=answer`,and `action=interact`.", "type": "string"}, "time": {"description": "The seconds to wait.
Required only by `action=long_press` and `action=wait`.", "type": "number"}, "button": {"description": "Back means returning to the
previous interface, Home means returning to the desktop, Menu means opening the application background menu, and Enter means
pressing the enter. Required only by `action=system_button`", "enum": ["Back", "Home", "Menu", "Enter"], "type": "string"}, "status":
{"description": "The status of the task. Required only by `action=terminate`.", "type": "string", "enum": ["success", "failure"]}}, "required":
["action"], "type": "object"}, "args_format": "Format the arguments as a JSON object."}}
</tools>

Figure 9: Action space definition in mobile GUI environments.

21

User Instruction: What's the total number of items sold in the most recent 7 orders?
Observation 𝒕𝒕

Computer Use Agent
Proposed Action 𝒕𝒕
Click on the Sales menu in the sidebar.
<tool_call>
{"name": "computer_use", "arguments": {"action":
"left_click", "coordinate": [34, 310]}}
</tool_call>

Verbal Feedback
Error Analysis by GUI-Critic-R1

<thinking>
**Observation**: The screenshot shows the Magento admin dashboard with various sections such as
"Advanced Reporting," "Lifetime Sales,“ and "Last Orders." The "Sales" menu option is visible in the sidebar,
indicating it can be interacted with.
**Possible Result**: Clicking on the "Sales" menu will likely navigate to a page displaying salesrelated data, including order details, which could help in identifying the most recent 7 orders and their
item counts.
**Critique**: The decision to click on the "Sales" menu is correct because accessing sales-related data is
necessary to fulfill the user's request for the total number
\ of items sold in the most recent 7 orders. This
action aligns with the goal of gathering the required information.
</thinking>
<score>Correct
</score>
<suggestion>
The agent correctly clicked on the "Sales" menu to access relevant sales data for further analysis.
</suggestion>

Visually Grounded Error Analysis by Our critic

<think>
The marker targets the "CATALOG" sidebar item (red cube icon), which directly contradicts the agent’s
stated intent to click the "Sales" icon. Executing this click will navigate to the product catalog page,
which exclusively contains product management tools and zero order-related metrics. The goal requires
calculating items from the 7 most recent orders. By violating the UI rule that order data is housed under
"Sales," the agent traps itself in an irrelevant section and cannot complete the task.
</think>
<criticism>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Action-Operation Misalignment
Explanation: The action will navigate to the Catalog section, which displays product management
tools rather than order data. The UI rule is that order-related metrics and lists are exclusively accessible
through the Sales section, not the Catalog. Since the goal requires analyzing order quantities, this
misnavigation prevents access to the necessary order details, making the step ineffective.
</criticism>

Figure 10: Illustration of the visual grounding limitation in existing critics. When the policy generates an action
with a logically correct textual intent ("Click on the Sales menu") but outputs misaligned spatial coordinates that
actually target the "Catalog" icon, the baseline critic erroneously approves the action by over-relying on the text. In
contrast, our proposed critic evaluates the precise physical execution using a visual marker, successfully detecting
the spatial mismatch and intercepting the Action-Operation Misalignment before it executes.

22

User Instruction: Check if the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police can be reached in one hour by car
from gates building at CMU.

Clicked
wrong UI

Computer
Use Agent

<think> The last attempt to
open the route planner
accidentally opened the Share
panel instead... </think>
Proposed Action
Click the close “X” button at the
top-right corner of the
“Welcome to OpenStreetMap!”
pop-up to dismiss the modal.

…

<think> With the share panel closed, the map and
its main controls are fully accessible... </think>
Proposed Action
Click the “Directions” icon (the two-person
walking figure) in the left-side vertical toolbar to
open the route planner.

\

Forgot the past
failure and clicked
the wrong UI again

Failure to track
history state
Verbal Feedback by GUI-Critic-R1

<score>Correct</score>
<suggestion>The agent correctly clicked on the “Directions" icon to open the route planner to enter
the origin and destination.</suggestion>

History State Tracking by Our critic

Progress Summary: No actions have successfully progressed the task; the route planner remains
unopened and the welcome panel is still visible.
Last Action Result: A tooltip reading "Zoom in to add a note to the map" appeared over the map area,
indicating the click did not open the route planner.",

Macro-action History
<think> I previously clicked the wrong control—
the “add a note” button—so the route planner
didn’t open. To fix this, I need to locate and click
the actual Directions control…</think>
Proposed Action
Click the “X” close button at the top-right corner
of the Share panel to dismiss the overlay.

Clicked the correct
routing plan UI in the
next step.

…

Figure 11: Illustration of the history state tracking limitation in existing critics. When the policy generates an action
that clicked the wrong UI, the baseline critic fails to log past failures, leaving the policy without the feedback needed
to avoid making the same mistake. In contrast, our proposed critic maintains a macro-action history, tracking the
history state and enabling the policy to recognize prior failures to proceed in long-horizon GUI task.

23

Task: Use adobe illustrator to open the picture
…waterfall-9642279_1280.jpg
Proposed Action: In the file explorer window, click
on the image file named "waterfall9642279_1280.jpg" to select it.
<tool_call>{"name": "computer_use",
"arguments": {"action": "left_click", "coordinate":
[402, 295]}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Grounding/Spatial Error
Explanation: The click will land in the empty space
beneath the image file entry, resulting in no
selection and leaving the filename field blank.

Task: Remove the booking.com application.
Proposed Action: Click on the 'Storage & cache'
section to review storage details
<tool_call>{"name": "mobile_use", "arguments":
{"action": "click", "coordinate": [338,
722]}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Procedural Prerequisite Neglect
Explanation: The click on the background
"Storage & cache" section will be ignored
because the active confirmation dialog blocks all
interactions with elements behind it.

Figure 12: Representative examples of common CUA failure modes. (Top) Grounding/Spatial Error: The agent
forms the correct semantic intent but outputs flawed coordinates, clicking the empty space beneath the file instead
of selecting it. (Bottom) Procedural Prerequisite Neglect: The agent attempts to interact with a background UI
element while a confirmation dialog is active, blocking the click and resulting in a silent failure.

24

Task: In the Reminders app, mark every reminder
in the "Travel" list as completed
Proposed Action: Click the blue '1' badge in the
top-right corner of the Travel list to complete the
remaining task
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Semantic Error
<tool_call>{"name": "computer_use", "arguments":
{"action": "left_click", "coordinate": [964,
121]}}</tool_call>
Explanation: Clicking the numeric badge will not
change any reminder's completion state because it is
a read-only counter that reflects the number of
uncompleted items, not a control to mark tasks done.

Task: Relocate the note information.txt from ailab
to pjlab in the Markor app.
Proposed Action: Click on 'Rename' in the file
options menu to prepare the file for relocation
<tool_call>{"name": "mobile_use", "arguments":
{"action": "click", "coordinate": [634,
200]}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Visual Hallucination
Explanation: The action will result in a silent
failure because the menu does not contain a
"Rename" option, so no operation will be initiated.

Figure 13: Representative examples of common CUA failure modes (continued). (Top) Semantic Error: The agent
misunderstands UI affordances, attempting to click a read-only numeric counter. (Bottom) Visual Hallucination:
The agent hallucinates a UI element, attempting to click a "Rename" option that does not exist in the current
screenshot.

25

Task: In Pages, rename the document to 'Project
Report
Proposed Action: Press Enter to confirm the
document name change
<tool_call>{"name": "computer_use",
"arguments": {"action": "key"}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Action Formulation Error
Explanation: The key action will trigger a parser
crash because it lacks the required "keys" array
to specify which key to press, leaving the dialog
unchanged.

Task: While playing any video, tap the settings
icon, select “Playback Speed”, and change it to
1.5x.
Proposed Action: Tap the 1.25 speed option to
increase video playback speed
<tool_call>{"name": "mobile_use", "arguments":
{"action": "click", "coordinate": [500,
945]}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Constraint Neglect
Explanation: The playback speed will change to
1.25x instead of 1.5x, violating the explicit
requirement to select the 1.5x option.

Figure 14: Representative examples of common CUA failure modes (continued). (Top) Action Formulation Error:
The agent intends to press ’Enter’ but omits the required key parameter in the JSON payload, crashing the parser.
(Bottom) Constraint Neglect: The agent successfully navigates the UI but selects a 1.25x playback speed instead of
the explicitly requested 1.5x.

26

Task: Submit a request to merge dialogcomponent branch into dialog branch, assign
Carol as the reviewer.
Proposed Action: Scroll down slightly to reveal the
Reviewer section where Carol can be assigned as
reviewer.
<tool_call>{"name": "computer_use",
"arguments": {"action": "scroll", "pixels": 20}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Parameter Vector Miscalibration
Explanation: The page will shift downward by only
20 pixels, an imperceptible amount that won't
meaningfully reveal the Reviewer section.

Task: Send the message I just sent again to
464857546 via Simple SMS Messenger.
Proposed Action: Terminate the process as the
task is complete
<tool_call>{"name": "mobile_use", "arguments":
{"action": "terminate", "status":
"success"}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Termination Misjudgment
Explanation: The process halts abruptly without
opening the conversation for 464857546 or
sending the message, leaving the UI unchanged
and the task incomplete.

Figure 15: Representative examples of common CUA failure modes (continued). (Top) Parameter Vector Miscalibration: The agent attempts to scroll to off-screen content but issues a mere 20-pixel magnitude, failing to reveal
the target ’Reviewer’ section. (Bottom) Termination Misjudgment: The agent prematurely halts execution before
opening the target conversation and sending the message.

27

Task: Visit Trip.com and book a round-trip flight
from Shanghai to Seoul, departing on July 17,
2025 and returning on July 20, 2025.
Proposed Action: Scroll down slightly to look for
additional navigation controls that may be below
the visible area.
<tool_call>{"name": "computer_use",
"arguments": {"action": "mouse_move",
"coordinate": [500,
554]}}</tool_call><tool_call>{"name":
"computer_use", "arguments": {"action": "scroll",
"pixels": -500}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Observation Neglect
Explanation: The action will cause the page to
scroll downward, moving the visible "Continue"
button out of view and forcing the user to scroll
back up to access the control that is already
present.
Task: List the titles of my high priority tasks in the
Tasks app, using commas to separate multiple
entries.
Proposed Action: Open the Tasks app from your
home screen to view your to-do list with
upcoming assignments and appointments
<tool_call>{"name": "mobile_use", "arguments":
{"action": "click", "coordinate": [500,
710]}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Action-Operation Misalignment
Explanation: The screen will unexpectedly
transition to the camera viewfinder, showing a
live preview of the surroundings, shutter controls,
and mode selection options instead of the task
list interface.

Figure 16: Representative examples of common CUA failure modes (continued). (Top) Observation Neglect: The
agent scrolls downward to search for controls, unnecessarily moving the already visible "Continue" button out of
view. (Bottom) Action-Operation Misalignment: The agent intends to open the "Tasks" app but outputs coordinates
for the camera app, launching the viewfinder instead.

28

Task: In Keynote, set the font size of the title to
36pt.
Perturbed Action: Click the small down arrow
button next to the '116 pt' font size field to
decrease the font size.
<tool_call>{"name": "computer_use",
"arguments": {"action": "left_click", "coordinate":
[986, 451]}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Suboptimal Path
Explanation: The font size will increase by one
step (e.g., to 117 pt) because the up arrow
control raises the value, moving further from the
36 pt target.

Task: While playing any video, tap the settings
icon, select “Playback Speed”, and change it to
1.5x.
Proposed Action: Click on the center of the clock
face to navigate to the bedtime settings.
<tool_call>{"name": "mobile_use", "arguments":
{"action": "click", "coordinate": [500,
500]}}</tool_call>
Overall Grading: Bad
Error Dimension: Timing and Latency Neglect
Explanation: The system will ignore the click as
the app is still in a loading state with no
interactive elements available.

Figure 17: Representative examples of common CUA failure modes (continued). (Top) Suboptimal Path: The agent
attempts to decrease a font size but mistakenly clicks the "up" arrow, moving further from the target goal. (Bottom)
Timing and Latency Neglect: The agent interacts with the UI during a non-interactive loading state, causing the
system to ignore the premature click.

29

